SURF-445 Document GQL labeled predicate (G111 / CIP-249). (#1507)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/expressions/predicates/label-expression-predicates.adoc

You can use a label expression predicate to verify that the labels of a node or the relationship type of a relationship match a given label expression.

Cypher supports the colon form (`<expr>:<label-expression>`) in every Cypher version that supports xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expressions].

> As of Neo4j 2026.04, the `IS [NOT] LABELED` form is also supported; see <<is-labeled-predicate>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypher supports two label expression alternatives:

* Colon form (`<expr>:<label-expression>`)
* `IS [NOT] LABELED`  form label:new[Introduced in Neo4j 2026.04] label:cypher[Cypher 25 only]
```

[[label-expression-predicat-syntax]]
== Syntax

[[label-expression-predicate-colon-syntax]]
=== Colon form

[source, syntax]
----
<expr>:<label-expression>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<label-expression>` is any Cypher xref::patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression].

[[is-labeled-predicate]]
[role=label--new-Neo4j-2026.04 label--cypher-25-only]
=== `IS [NOT] LABELED` predicate

> As of Neo4j 2026.04, xref:appendix/gql-conformance/supported-optional.adoc#g111[optional GQL feature G111] adds the following syntax, equivalent to the colon form for nodes and relationships:

Reviewer: The GQL status of a feature, including its feature code, is only relevant to the GQL appendix.

```suggestion
```

[source, syntax]
----
<expr> IS LABELED <label-expression>
<expr> IS NOT LABELED <label-expression>
<expr> IS NOT <label-expression>
----

* If `<expr>` evaluates to `null`, the predicate result is `null`.

> * Otherwise, the label expression is evaluated against the node's label set or the relationship's single type, and the result is `true` or `false` as for the colon form.

Reviewer: What exactly does "as for the colon form" mean here? Do you mean "..., equivalent to the colon form"?

Author: yes. i rephrase it

> * `IS NOT LABELED <label-expression>` is equivalent to `NOT (<expr> IS LABELED <label-expression>)`: it negates the entire label expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `IS NOT LABELED <label-expression>` negates the result of the entire label expression.
```

>   This is different from using `!` *inside* the label expression; for example, `n IS LABELED !A&B` means `(!A) & B`, while `n IS NOT LABELED A&B` means `NOT` the conjunction `A&B`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is different from using `!` *inside* the label expression.
For example:
** `n IS LABELED !A&B` means the node has label `B`, and does not have label `A`.
** `n IS NOT LABELED A&B` means yhe node does not have both label `A` and label `B`.
```

> [IMPORTANT]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
```

You can use a label expression predicate to verify that the labels of a node or the relationship type of a relationship match a given label expression.

Cypher supports the colon form (`<expr>:<label-expression>`) in every Cypher version that supports xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expressions].

> As of Neo4j 2026.04, the GQL forms (`IS [NOT] LABELED`) are also supported; see <<gql-labeled-predicate>>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Neo4j 2026.04, the GQL form (`IS [NOT] LABELED`) is also supported; see <<gql-labeled-predicate>>.
```

[[label-expression-predicat-syntax]]
== Syntax

[[label-expression-predicate-colon-syntax]]
=== Colon form

[source, syntax]
----
<expr>:<label-expression>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<label-expression>` is any Cypher xref::patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression].

[[gql-labeled-predicate]]
[role=label--new-Neo4j-2026.04 label--cypher-25-only]

> === GQL labeled predicate (`IS [NOT] LABELED`)

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this should be titled as such, it feels confusing to a reader, perhaps we leave out that it is GQL?

As of Neo4j 2026.04, xref:appendix/gql-conformance/supported-optional.adoc#g111[optional GQL feature G111] adds the following syntax, equivalent to the colon form for nodes and relationships:

[source, syntax]
----
<expr> IS LABELED <label-expression>
<expr> IS NOT LABELED <label-expression>
<expr> IS NOT <label-expression>
----

The third line is shorthand for `IS NOT LABELED` and is accepted for symmetry with GQL; it is normalized to `IS NOT LABELED` in the canonical spelling of the query.

> 

Reviewer 2: This feels very heavy for a docs manual, I am unsure it is useful

* If `<expr>` evaluates to `null`, the predicate result is `null`.
* Otherwise, the label expression is evaluated against the node's label set or the relationship's single type, and the result is `true` or `false` as for the colon form.
* `IS NOT LABELED <label-expression>` is equivalent to `NOT (<expr> IS LABELED <label-expression>)`: it negates the entire label expression.
  This is different from using `!` *inside* the label expression; for example, `n IS LABELED !A&B` means `(!A) & B`, while `n IS NOT LABELED A&B` means `NOT` the conjunction `A&B`.

> `LABELED` is not a reserved keyword and may still be used as an identifier, (for example, as a variable name) where the grammar allows an identifier.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is relevant

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

[[is-labeled-predicate-examples]]
[role=label--new-Neo4j-2026.04 label--cypher-25-only]
== Examples using `IS [NOT] LABELED`

> The following examples use the GQL keyword form; the same results are obtained with the colon form (for example `p:Manager` instead of `p IS LABELED Manager`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
